docs: design doc for supporting aws sse:s3 in RGW (#10318)
rook/rook: design/ceph/object/ceph-sse-s3.md

---
# AWS server side encryption SSE-S3 support for RGW
target-version: release-1.10
---

# Feature Name
AWS server side encryption SSE-S3 support for RGW

## Summary

> The S3 protocol over three different types of [server side encryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/serv-side-encryption.html): SSE-C, SSE-KMS and SSE-S3. For the last two RGW server need to configure with external services such as [vault](https://www.vaultproject.io/). Currently Rook configure RGW with `SSE-KMS` options, so that S3 request with `sse:kms` header will be handled properly. Recently the support for handling the `sse:s3` added to RGW with another set of options, so Rook needs to provide option to configure RGW similar to `SSE-KMS`.

Reviewer: > Currently Rook configure RGW with `SSE-KMS` options, so that S3 request with `sse:kms` header will be handled properly.

I understand from this that Ceph RGW currently supports sse:s3, and that those details are configured by Rook's `spec.security.kms`.

> Recently the support for handling the `sse:s3` added to RGW with another set of options, so Rook needs to provide option to configure RGW similar to `SSE-KMS`.

Will we need to do conditional handling in Rook? For example, will we need to tell users to use only the `kms` option for Ceph versions below v17 (or some other version)? If so, please capture that specific detail. At any rate, we need to note the Ceph version that adds support for `sse:s3` so we can be sure to document that the option doesn't apply for some Ceph versions.

> The S3 protocol over three different types of [server side encryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/serv-side-encryption.html): SSE-C, SSE-KMS and SSE-S3. For the last two RGW server need to configure with external services such as [vault](https://www.vaultproject.io/). Currently Rook configure RGW with `SSE-KMS` options, so that S3 request with `sse:kms` header will be handled properly. Recently the support for handling the `sse:s3` added to RGW with another set of options, so Rook needs to provide option to configure RGW similar to `SSE-KMS`.

Reviewer: "The S3 protocol over three different types..." doesn't make sense. Please revise.

> The S3 protocol supports three different types of [server side encryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/serv-side-encryption.html): SSE-C, SSE-KMS and SSE-S3. For the last two RGW server need to configure with external services such as [vault](https://www.vaultproject.io/). Currently Rook configure RGW with `SSE-KMS` options from v1.6 which needs atleast  cephv15, so that S3 request with `sse:kms` header will be handled properly. Recently the support for handling the `sse:s3` added to RGW(planning to support from cephv17 onwards) with another set of options, so Rook needs to provide option to configure RGW similar to `SSE-KMS`.

Reviewer 2: This feature is only for quincy, right? 
```suggestion
The S3 protocol supports three different types of [server side encryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/serv-side-encryption.html): SSE-C, SSE-KMS and SSE-S3. For the last two RGW server need to configure with external services such as [vault](https://www.vaultproject.io/). Currently Rook configure RGW with `SSE-KMS` options to handle the S3 requests with the `sse:kms` header. Recently the support for handling the `sse:s3` was added to RGW, so Rook will now provide the option to configure RGW with `sse:s3`.

The `sse:s3` is supported only from Ceph v17 an onwards, so this feature can only be enabled for Quincy or newer.
```

Author: Yaa the feature will be available in Quincy

### Goals
Configure RGW with `SSE-S3` options, so that RGW can handle request with `sse:s3` headers.

## Proposal details
Introducing new field `s3` in `SecuritySpec` which defines `AWS-SSE-S3` support for RGW.
```
security:
  kms:
    ..

>   s3:

Reviewer 2: According to [this comment](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/10318#discussion_r882887830), I thought the `sse:s3` would not be enabled by the `security` section, but looks like now that is the proposal? It does seem good this way so we don't need a separate bool for enabling it.

Author: Earlier decided it was to include bool/enum in `ObjectStoreSpec` to decide the flavour RGW support and use settings from SecuritySpec. But later after the discussions, it felt right to include it in the `Security` session

    connectionDetails:
      KMS_PROVIDER: vault
      VAULT_ADDR: https://vault.default.svc.cluster.local:8200
      VAULT_SECRET_ENGINE: transit
      VAULT_AUTH_METHOD: token
    # name of the k8s secret containing the kms authentication token
    tokenSecretName: rook-vault-token
```

> The values for this configuration will be available in [Security field](Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-store-crd.md#security-settings) of `CephObjectStoreSpec`, so depending on the above option RGW can be configured with `SSE-KMS` and `SSE-S3` options.

Reviewer: Please add a note that the options are not mutually exclusive and that they can be enabled/disabled independently. We should also note this in the doc update for users.

## Config options

> User can manually set below options from ceph-toolbox pod to configure with `SSE-S3` options for RGW.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before this design is implemented, the user could manually set below options from the toolbox pod to configure with `SSE-S3` options for RGW.
```

---

> title: include aws server side encryption s3 support for RGW 

Author: @travisn Server Side Encryption via  SSE-KMS is already supported for RGW

target-version: release-1.10
---

# Feature Name
AWS server side encryption SSE-S3 support for RGW

## Summary

> The S3 protocol over three different types of [server side encryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/serv-side-encryption.html): SSE-C, SSE-KMS and SSE-S3. For the last two RGW server need to configure with external services such as `vault`. Currently Rook can configure RGW with `SSE-KMS` options, so that S3 request with `sse:kms` header will be handled properly. Recently the support for handling the `sse:s3` added to RGW with another set of options, so Rook needs to provide option to configure RGW with those options.

Reviewer: Let's include a link to `vault` here.

### Goals
Configure RGW with `SSE-S3` options, so that RGW can handle request with `sse:s3` headers.
 
### Non-Goals

> Both `SSE-KMS` and `SSE-S3` will be configured with same set of values such as `vault-server`, `vault-secret-engine` etc

Reviewer: This is a detail and not a non-goal. Further, how will we handle forward compatibility if these do need to be configured separately in the future.

> Both `SSE-KMS` and `SSE-S3` will be configured with same set of values such as `vault-server`, `vault-secret-engine` etc

Author: SSE-KMS is already present, what I meant currently both uses same kms spec

## Proposal details
Introducing new field `s3` in `SecuritySpec` which defines `AWS-SSE-S3` support for RGW.
```
security:
  kms:
    ..
  s3:
    connectionDetails:

>       KMS_PROVIDER: vault

Reviewer 2: Besides following the pattern that we already have for settings under `security.kms`, is there a reason we don't follow more standard naming convention with camel case? For example, what about:
```
security:
  s3:
    connectionDetails:
      kmsProvider: vault
      vaultAddress: ...
...
```

Consistency with `security.kms` probably makes more sense like you have it, but I want to be clear why the settings are named this way.

Author: @travisn : `ConnectionDetails` is [string][string] map and `security.kms` has similar values, I have copied it from https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.9/Storage-Configuration/Advanced/key-management-system/#token-based-authentication only

Reviewer 2: Agreed, the string map makes sense, and also some consistency with the kms settings. The all caps settings are just not standard for CRDs.

> type AWSServerSideEncryptionSpec {

Reviewer 2: For the design doc, could you include the yaml example instead of the go types? It's more readable for the design.

Author: Sorry my bad, i didn't commit changes before refreshing the PR

> 	KMSEnabled bool `json:"kmsEnabled,omitempty"`

Author: Yes

	AWS AWSServerSideEncryptionSpec `json:"aws,omitempty"`
}
type ObjectStoreSpec struct {
...
	ServerSideEncryption RGWServerSideEncryptionSpec `json:"serverSideEncryption,omitempty"`
...

> } 

Reviewer: Where are `vault-server` and `vault-secret-engine` in this spec?

If those are read from `spec.security`, then I think this needs to be a sub-section of `spec.security`. Otherwise, the API separates the options, suggesting they are not related.

Author: This discussion is cycling back again and again. Please see [comment](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/10204#discussion_r876011585). `Security.kms` have connection details for the key management service required for both encryptions. Currently `sse:kms` is already part of Rook and it is enabled if the `Security` field basically contains key management service details. Since the option is specific to RGW or S3 it does not make sense to include in `Security` since it is more generic to Rook.Hence introduced new option in `ObjectStoreSpec`

Reviewer 2: Could you also describe in the design spec why it needs to be separate from the `security` section?

```

> The values for this configuration will be available in [Security field](Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-store-crd.md#security-settings) of `CephObjectStoreSpec`, so depending on the above option RGW can be configured with `SSE-KMS` and `SSE-S3` options. If `ServerSideEncryption` is empty but `Security` is not empty then RGW will be configured with `SSE-KMS` options for the backward compatibility. 

Author: Both `SSE:S3` and `SSE:KMS` requires `spec.Security.kms` since it points to details about key management service like vault

> The values for this configuration will be available in [Security field](Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-store-crd.md#security-settings) of `CephObjectStoreSpec`, so depending on the above option RGW can be configured with `SSE-KMS` and `SSE-S3` options. If `ServerSideEncryption` is empty but `Security` is not empty then RGW will be configured with `SSE-KMS` options for the backward compatibility. 

Reviewer: If that spec is required, then I think users will have the best understanding if `ServerSideEncryption` is part of `spec.Security`. In the end, both are related to security, and there is a spec section for that already existing.

> The values for this configuration will be available in [Security field](Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-store-crd.md#security-settings) of `CephObjectStoreSpec`, so depending on the above option RGW can be configured with `SSE-KMS` and `SSE-S3` options. If `ServerSideEncryption` is empty but `Security` is not empty then RGW will be configured with `SSE-KMS` options for the backward compatibility. 

Reviewer: I'm also have this concern: since both `spec.security.kms` and `spec.security.serverSideEncryption` are orthogonal, will users ever want to use one KMS for `spec.security.kms` and a different one for `spec.security.serverSideEncryption`? 

Or, even if that isn't expected, will the user experience of configuration be easier if we add `server`/`secretEngine` fields to `serverSideEncryption?

I think a trap that I see Rook's API falling into at times is making Rook's API reflect Ceph's configuration complexity, which unnecessarily exposes that complexity to users and makes it harder for users to grok configuration. Instead, we should focus on making sure Rook's API is for users first and foremost, and then Rook can translate that into Ceph terms. This is a topic that comes up a lot in API design.

> The values for this configuration will be available in [Security field](Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-store-crd.md#security-settings) of `CephObjectStoreSpec`, so depending on the above option RGW can be configured with `SSE-KMS` and `SSE-S3` options. If `ServerSideEncryption` is empty but `Security` is not empty then RGW will be configured with `SSE-KMS` options for the backward compatibility. 

Reviewer 2: So SSE-KMS is always enabled? In the backward compatible case, sounds like there is no way to know it should be disabled. With the new schema, we would know if it's disabled with the new bool. But if it doesn't ever need to be disabled, we don't really need this setting.

Reviewer 2: How about a separate paragraph on backward compatibility, just to be clear about the separation between new and old functionality.

Author: > So SSE-KMS is always enabled? In the backward compatible case, sounds like there is no way to know it should be disabled. With the new schema, we would know if it's disabled with the new bool. But if it doesn't ever need to be disabled, we don't really need this setting.

What I meant was if `Security` field of `cephobjectstorespec` is set and `ServerSideEncryption` is not mentioned then RGW will be configured with SSE-KMS options for handling backward compatibility issues

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 2: I think the point is to show what toolbox commands will be executed by the operator, right?
```suggestion
## Config Commands
```

User can manually set below options from ceph-toolbox pod to configure with `SSE-S3` options for RGW.
```
ceph config set <ceph auth user for rgw> rgw_crypt_sse_s3_backend vault

> ceph config set <ceph auth user for rgw> rgw_crypt_sse_s3_vault_secret_engine <kv|transit>

Author: Its user-given option, Rook will just pass it from `connectionDetails` struct to RGW
